---
month: August 2020
title: "August 2020: Worship"
back: true
---

In the spring of 2013, Meg and I started attending at a small church
(explain plant?) in our neighborhood in East Dallas. At the time, the
welcome committee consisted of the music pastor and his wife who took
us to dinner one evening after our third or fourth Sunday there. Meg
and I had been proper parents for a little over a year—Olivia had been
earth-side since February 2012—and were on the prowl for fellow
young-child-havers. It's a strange time in a person's life, that first
year as a parent. You're constantly readjusting while desparately
seeking consistency. When they say that becoming a parent
completely uproots your existence and identity, they don't mean that it uproots
them and then replant them somewhere else. No, your identity is now
in the bed of a truck, then maybe a train, eventually landing
somewhere to be replanted long enough to take hold, to be strong
enough to stand on its own, only to be uprooted again, resold
to someone pushing an orange cart at a Home Depot who plans to put you
in their own garden, calling you theirs, and not giving a fuck whether
or not “you used to play the drums in a band”.

This church seemed to have exactly what we were looking for. In fact,
this music pastor and his wife we'd observed, or at least I had, they
seemed like cool folks, which is to say they seemed like us—mirror
neurons and all that. When I learned that they were the welcome
committee, I almost /engineered/ a meeting, saying we Were New Here,
with intention to reluctantly mention that I was a drummer. As I
recall, the evening went exactly as planned. Within a few weeks, I was
playing drums in the band on Sunday mornings. I can remember the
rehearsal for the first Sunday I played, there was a song with an
front-of-the-overalls sized pocket and I was buried like week-old lint
in it. He told me, “yeah, so, there's in the pocket, and then there's
/in the pocket/… I think… you're dragging.” He was right.

---

Come April, and Easter, we'd begun to plan a big Easter service. When
we started at the church, we met in a public elementary school's
auditorium. The school was a midcentury relic, nestled behind 100
year-old oak trees, the sidewalks cracked to the tree's whims. The
auditorium was 98% hardwood. The floor, the stage, the folding
chairs. The other two per cent was velvet and iron, respectively
hiding the unkept borders of the stage and creakily folding the
chairs, some of whom had seen their last fold. As rigid as the velvet
and iron they chartered, the district did not renew the church's
lease, and we needed somewhere else to worship. Soon, we found
ourselves using another school's auditorium, a private school, this
one all glass and steel with linoleum floors. It bordered a huge
public park, one that had the tendency to flood during the Texas
prarie flash-flood thunderstorms.

So, Easter. Easter is the most important holiday to a christian. On
Easter, Christ is believed to be risen from the dead, to have
/defeated/ death, paying for our sins and paving the way for our
salvation. We'd planned to be rent out that park and have our Easter
service there, with the intention that our message would be loud
enough, literally, to be heard by the whole East Side. A stage was
built. It was one of those rubber and steel contraptions that look
like someone had disassembled a 10-story crane and refashioned it,
tires and all, into a stage. We transported a sound board and its
serpent companion outside. I arrived on the scene at 0715—the service
was at 1000—and began to unload my drums from the back of my Honda
hatchback.

The place was bustling. It seemed like the whole church was already
there, their hands busy in service, repeatedly turning to those whose
lives were objects of service, and saying, “what next?” The sun had
begun to peek through a layer of Spring clouds, like it was searing a
hole in them, determined to see what we were up to. The grass at the
basin of the park glistened with dew, turning it into a field of
interspersed gold and green, the sun like king midas, turning what it
could reach into precious metal. I opened one drum case at time,
starting with the hardware, as I'd done hundreds of times before. When
I was asked, “how can I help?” all I could think to say was, where
should I park my car? This resulted in my car being moved /for/ me,
and for my keys to no longer be on my person. Once everthing was
racked and secured, once I'd made all of the micro-adjustments that
are necessary, I seet a pair of sticks on my bass drum, a pair on my
snare, and joined the ”what next?” gestalt. I swept the cement floor
of a covered pinic area.

A few minutes later, someone came and found me, it had begun to
sprinkle a little, and he wanted me to know. Did I need to do anything
to protect my drums. I followed him back out to the stage and we took
my drums, a peice at a time, under the cover of the picnic area I'd
just swept. Then, in an instant, thunder cracked the sky, and that
dappling sunlight was sucked into it. A thunderstorm rolled over the
park, darkening the sun-kissed grass, removing its lustre like time in
reverse, turning diamonds back to coal. Soon, the bottom dropped out
of the storm, and sheets of water were falling from it, set up became
tear down, all the gear and chairs and food and bibles were going
/back/ into trucks and boxes.

# congregation soaked, just us. it was for us not them, is that okay? what does that mean?
